


1The concepts developed in this discussion, including the notion of
          customized currency baskets, except for the Global Reserve Currency Index
          (GRCI), have been developed and presented by Giuseppe Ballocchi at a number of
          conferences over the years. Hélie d’Hautefort is the creator of
          the GRCI. See also Ballocchi (2008).


2The functions of money were first described by William Stanley
          Jevons, a British economist (Jevons 1875).


3The “streetlight effect” refers to an old joke: A
          police officer sees a drunk man searching for something under a streetlight
          and asks him what he is looking for. The drunk says he has lost his keys, and
          the two men look under the streetlight together. After a few minutes, the
          officer asks the drunk if he is sure he lost his keys here, and the drunk says
          no, he lost them in the park. The policeman asks why he is searching here, and
          the drunk replies, “This is where the light is.”


4For the dollar’s replacement of the pound sterling as the
          world’s reserve currency, see Chitu, Eichengreen, and Mehl (2014);
          Eichengreen and Flandreau (2009 and 2012); and Eichengreen (2011).


5They have also been recently introduced in crisis-stricken
          eurozone countries, such as Cyprus and Greece.


6For central banks, Gintschel and Scherer (2004) advocate a dual
          benchmark optimization approach for wealth and liquidity
          preservation.


7Seewww.bis.organdwww.imf.org.


8Currency basket indexes have been proposed recently by other
          authors. To our knowledge, the GRCI, introduced in 2009, was the first. The GRCI
          was developed in response to investor demand for an independent and objective
          store of global wealth, capable of withstanding currency turmoil and
          depreciation. It is also used as the reference for recently launched
          Globcoin®multi-currency accounts. Reserve Currency Solutions
          owns the intellectual property underpinning the GRCI and produces and maintains
          the index.


9The performance hedged into the GRCI is calculated daily as the
          sum of the performance of the S&P 500 and of the GRCI itself, both expressed
          in US dollars. It corresponds to an investment in the S&P 500 together with
          a foreign exchange overlay into the GRCI (short the US dollar and long the GRCI)
          for the full amount invested into the S&P 500.
